[DOCS] ES|QL pages in Kibana guide (#170226)
elastic/kibana: docs/discover/try-esql.asciidoc

[[try-esql]]

> == Try ES|QL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Try {esql}
```

preview::[]

The Elasticsearch Query Language, {esql}, makes it easier to explore your data without leaving Discover. 

In this tutorial we'll use the {kib} sample web logs in Discover and Lens to explore the data and create visualizations. 

[float]
[[prerequisite]]
=== Prerequisite 

To be able to select **Try {esql}** from the Data views menu the `discover:enableESQL` setting must be enabled from **Stack Management > Advanced Settings**. It is enabled by default. 

[float]
[[tutorial-try-esql]]

> === Trying ES|QL 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Trying {esql}
```

To load the sample data:

. On the home page, click **Try sample data**.
. Click **Other sample data sets**.
. On the Sample web logs card, click **Add data**.
. Open the main menu and select *Discover*.

> . From the Data views menu, select *Try ES|QL*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. From the Data views menu, select *Try {esql}*.
```

Author: Thanks for catching all these! Sorry about missing the attribute

[[try-esql]]
== Try ES|QL

preview::[]

> The Elasticsearch Query Language, ES|QL, has been created to make exploring your data easier without leaving the Discover application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Elasticsearch Query Language, {esql}, makes it easier to explore your data without leaving Discover. 
```
Just a suggestion

> In the tutorial below we'll use the {kib} Sample Data Logs in Discover and Lens suggestions to explore the data and visualization. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we'll use the {kib} sample web logs in Discover and Lens to explore the data and create visualizations. 
```

[float]
[[prerequisite]]
=== Prerequisite 

To be able to select **Try {esql}** from the Data views menu the `discover:enableESQL` setting must be enabled from **Stack Management > Advanced Settings**. It is enabled by default. 

[float]
[[tutorial-try-esql]]
=== Trying ES|QL 

> Learn how to build queries to pull information out of your data and create visualizations using {esql}. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Seems like a repetition from earlier.

> To get the sample data into Discover:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load the sample data:
```

. On the home page, click **Try sample data**.
. Click **Other sample data sets**.
. On the Sample web logs card, click **Add data**.
. Open the main menu and select *Discover*.
. From the Data views menu, select *Try ES|QL*.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/try-esql.png[An image of the Discover UI where users can try the new ES|QL feature]

> Let's say we want to find out what machine operating system users have and how much ram is on their machine.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we want to find out what operating system users have and how much RAM is on their machine.  
```

[NOTE]
====
{esql} keywords are not case sensitive. 

> ====

Reviewer: I would move this down until after the first query.

. Set the time range to **Last 7 days**.
. Expand image:images/expand-icon-2.png[An image of the expand icon] the query bar.
. Put each processing command on a new line for better readability.
. Copy the query below:
+
[source,esql]

> ----
> from kibana_sample_data_logs 
> | keep machine.os, machine.ram
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
FROM kibana_sample_data_logs 
| KEEP machine.os, machine.ram
----
```
We're using capitalized keywords for ES|QL in the ES docs. Probably good to be consistent.

+
. Click **Update**.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/esql-machine-os-ram.png[An image of the query result]

> Let's add to our query to find out the geographical destination of the visits and limit the results. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's add `geo.dest` to our query, to find out the geographical destination of the visits, and limit the results. 
```

. Copy the query below:
+
[source,esql]
----

> from kibana_sample_data_logs 
> | keep machine.os, machine.ram, geo.dest
> | limit 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM kibana_sample_data_logs 
| KEEP machine.os, machine.ram, geo.dest
| LIMIT 10
```

----
+
. Click **Update**.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image:images/esql-limit.png[An image of the extended query result]

Let's sort the data by machine ram and filter out the destination GB. 

. Copy the query below:
+
[source,esql]
----

> from kibana_sample_data_logs 
> | keep machine.os, machine.ram, geo.dest
> | sort machine.ram desc
> | where geo.dest != "GB"
> | limit 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM kibana_sample_data_logs 
| KEEP machine.os, machine.ram, geo.dest
| SORT machine.ram desc
| WHERE geo.dest != "GB"
| LIMIT 10
```
